# **The Process Creation Hierarchy**
- A [[process]] creation hierarchy is a graphical representation of the dynamically changing parent-child relationships among all processes
- The hierarchy is changed each time a process is created or destroyed

### **The Process Creation Hierarchy**
1. When the OS starts, a Root process is created (Level 0), which becomes the parent of other OS processes (Level 1).
2. One of the OS processes becomes the highest ancestor of all user processes. Ex: In Unix this ancestor process is called Init.
3. Whenever a new user logs in, a new user process is created (Level 2). The main task of each user process is to communicate with the user.
4. Each User process can itself create child processes to perform various tasks (Level 3). Ex: A browser (Edge), a communication tool (Skype), or a scientific simulator (Weather).
5. Each child processes can in turn create other child processes (Level 4). Ex: Weather could create processes to perform independent sub-computations in parallel.
6. When a process is destroyed, the question arises: What to do with the destroyed process's children?
7. Some OSs (Ex: Unix) make the Init process the new parent of the deleted process's children.
8. Other OSs choose to destroy the process as well as all of the process's descendants.

---

# **Process Creation**
When the currently running process initiates the creation of a child process, the OS executes a **create process function** create()

The create process function:
- Allocates a new [[PCB]]
- Fills the [[PCB]] entries with initial values
- Links the [[PCB]] to other data structures in the system

Steps as follows:
1. A new PCB is allocated. The PCB is uniquely identified by a pointer or an array index p.
2. The fields cpu_state, memory, scheduling_information, and accounting_information are filled using the initial values supplied to the function as parameters.
3. Assuming the state transition diagram consists of only the three states, running, ready, and blocked, the process state field is set to ready.
4. The parent field of process p is set to point to self, which is the calling process and thus the parent of p.
5. In turn, process p is inserted into the calling process's list of children as a new child.
6. The remaining fields are set to NULL, since at creation process p has no children, no open files, and no other resources.
7. p is inserted into the RL.
8. The [[Process Scheduler|scheduler]] function is called to select the process to run. Depending on the priorities of the two processes, the [[Process Scheduler|scheduler]] could choose to start the new child process p or to continue the execution of p's parent process.
9. When the [[Process Scheduler|scheduler]] returns, the function returns the ID of the new child (p) to the calling process.

### **Code:**
```python
create(state0, mem0, sched0, acc0):
    p = allocate new PCB
    p.cpu_state = state0
    p.memory = mem0
    p.scheduling_information = sched0
    p.accounting_information = acc0
    p.process_state = ready
    p.parent = self
    p.children = NULL
    p.open_files = NULL
    p.other_resources = NULL
    insert p into self.children
    insert p into RL
    scheduler()
    return p
```

---

# **Process Destruction**
[[Process]] p can be terminated by the parent process by calling the destroy function

*Completing all work or committing a fatal error also results in the process's destruction*

Destroy process function destroys a process by:
- Freeing the PCB data structure
- Removing any references to the PCB from the system
- Depending on the OS, it may also destroy all of the process's descendants
	- This prevents having orphan processes in the system
	- This is accomplished by calling the destroy function recursively on all children of p


Destroy Process Function Steps:
1. After calling destroy(c) on all child processes, remove process p from either the RL (when p is ready) or from the waiting list of a resource (when p is blocked).
2. Remove process p from the list of children of the calling process.
3. Release all memory and other resources, close all open files, and deallocate the PCB.
4. Call the scheduler to select the next process to run. The call must be made outside of the destroy(p) function to guarantee that the scheduler executes only once, after the entire hierarchy of processes has been destroyed, rather than as part of every recursive call to destroy(c).

### **Code**
```python
destroy(p):
    for all c in p.children:
        destroy(c)
    remove p from RL or waiting list
    remove p from parent.children
    release p.memory
    release p.other_resources
    close all p.open_files
    deallocate PCB

scheduler()
```
