The software solution to the [[Critical Section|CS]] problem has major shortcomings:
1. Solution only works for 2 processes
	- When 3 or more processes need to share a CS a different solution is needed
2. The solution is inefficient
	- While one process is in the [[Critical Section|CS]], the other process must wait by repeatedly testing and setting the synchronization variables
	- The waiting process is wasting CPU and memory resources without accomplishing work
3. Solution addresses only competition among processes
	- To address problems of process cooperation entirely different solutions are needed

# **Basic Principles of Semaphores**
Semaphores are general-purpose primitives that allow solving a variety of synchronization problems in a systematic manner

A **semaphore** s is a non-negative integer variable that can be accessed using only two special operations **P(s) and V(s)**

- V(s) - Increment s by 1
- P(s) - if s > 0 decrement s by 1, otherwise wait until s > 0

This implementation must guarantee that:
- If several processes simultaneously invoke P(s) or V(s):
	- The operations will occur sequentially in some arbitrary order
- If more than one process is waiting inside P(s) for s to become > 0:
	- One of the waiting processes is selected to complete the P(s) operation
	- The selection can be at random but typically maintains the blocked processes in FIFO order

**Example**
1. Two concurrent processes p and q share a semaphore s. The initial value is s = 1.
2. p executes V(s), which increments s by 1.
3. q executes P(s) twice. Since s = 2, each P(s) operation successfully decrements s and q continues executing.
4. When p executes P(s), s = 0 and so p becomes blocked on s.
5. When q executes V(s), s becomes 1, which unblocks p. The P(s) operation by p can now decrement s and p may continue executing.
6. When p and q execute V(s) simultaneously, the implementation executes the operations in a random order. The value of s is incremented by 2.
7. Similarly, when p and q execute P(s) simultaneously, the implementation executes the operations in a random order. The value of s is decremented by 2 and p and q continue.
8. When s = 1 and both processes execute P(s) then one process is chosen at random to process while the other process is blocked on the semaphore.
9. When a V(s) operation increments s again, p becomes unblocked.
10. The P(s) operation can now complete by decrementing s and p may continue.

# **The CS Problem Using Semaphores**
A single semaphore, initialized to 1, is sufficient to solve the problem for any number of processes

1. n concurrent processes need to access a CS. A semaphore mutex (named for mutual exclusion), is initially set to 1.
2. Before entering the CS, a process executes P(mutex), which sets mutex to 0. After leaving CS, the process increments mutex back to 1 using V(mutex).
3. If no other process is trying to enter CS then p1 can enter CS repeatedly. Thus lockout is not possible.
4. When multiple processes try to enter CS simultaneously, only one will pass P(mutex). All others block. Thus mutual exclusion is guaranteed and deadlock is not possible.
5. Upon exiting CS, the current process executes V(mutex). When mutex becomes 1, the waiting P(mutex) operations again compete with each other for entry into CS.
6. One of the blocked processes is chosen at random (p1) and enters the CS. pi may continue but starvation is not possible since pi cannot reenter CS before p1.
7. When p1 exits CS, the V(mutex) operation again enables one of the waiting processes, one of which is chosen at random to proceed into CS.


# **The Bounded-Buffer Problem**
Semaphores offer a solution to the bounded-buffer problem that satisfies the requirements that **producers do not overtake consumers and vice-versa**
- Two semaphores are used to coordinate the processes
- The semaphore f represents the number of full buffer slots
- It it incremented each time the producer places a new data item into the buffer
- It is decremented each time the consumer removes an item from the buffer
- The semaphore e represents the number of empty slots and is modified by the producer and consumer analogously

**Detailed**:
1. A producer and a consumer share a buffer of size n. Initially, the semaphores e and f are set to show that all slots are empty.
2. Since no slot is full (f = 0 and e = n), the consumer becomes blocked on P(f).
3. The producer passes P(e), which decrements e to n-1.
4. After depositing a data item into the buffer, the producer executes V(f), which increments the number of full buffer slots to 1 and enables the consumer to proceed.
5. At this point either or both processes may continue. If the producer continues filling successive slots, e is decremented and f is incremented with each new data item.
6. The consumer may follow by decrementing f and incrementing e each time a buffer slot is emptied.
7. If the producer runs ahead and fills all slots, f = n and e = 0. The producer is now blocked from overrunning the consumer and overwriting slots not yet copied by the consumer.
8. Only after the consumer has emptied at least one slot and incremented e is the producer able to continue.