# **Hardware support for Synchronization**
Most contemporary computer architectures offer hardware support for process sync in the form of specialized machine instructions

The **test-and-set instruction (TS)**:
- Copies a variable into a register and sets the variable to zero
- Test-and-set has the form TS(R, x) where R is a register and x is a memory location and performs the following operations:
	- Copy x into R
	- Set x to 0

A **lock** is a synchronization barrier through which only one process can pass at a time. TS allows an easy implementation of a lock

**Lock using TS instruction**:
1. Two processes, p1 and p2, share a lock, implemented using a TS instruction on a shared variable x. R1 is a register of p1 and R2 is a register of p2.
2. Initially, x = 0, implying that neither process may pass the lock. The initial values of R1 and R2 are irrelevant at this time.
3. Process p1 executes TS, which copies x into R1 and sets x = 0. Since R1 remains 0, p1 continues executing the while-loop repeatedly.
4. Similarly, the TS of p2 copies x into R2 and sets x = 0. Since R2 is 0, p2 also keeps executing the while-loop repeatedly.
5. Both p1 and p2 are waiting inside the respective while-loops for the lock to open.
6. Later a third process p3 opens the lock by writing a 1 into x.
7. Whichever process reaches TS first, copies the 1 into the register and sets x back to 0. Here p1 executed TS first.
8. Since R1 = 1, process p1 passes the lock and continues with the next instruction while process p2 remains in the while-loop executing TS.

# **Binary Semaphores**
Many synchronization problems do not require the full power of a general semaphore

A **binary semaphore** can take only the values 0 or 1
- Pb and Vb are the simplified P and V operations that manipulate binary semaphores
- Pb and Vb on the binary semaphore sb can be implemented using TS instruction:
	- Vb(sb): sb = 1
	- pb(sb): do TS(R, sb) while R == 0

**Busy-waiting** is the act of repeatedly executing a loop while waiting for some condition to change
- Consumes CPU resources and should be avoided when possible
- The implementation of Pb(sb) using TS is simple but suffers from drawback of busy-waiting

**Synchronization problem using binary semaphores**:
1. The single semaphore used in the CS problem never exceeds the value 1. Therefore, a binary semaphore, mutex, with the corresponding Pb and Vb operations, is sufficient to solve the problem.
2. Only one process at a time can pass the Pb(mutex) operation.
3. If p1 enters, p2 remains blocked until p1 executes Vb(mutex).
4. When p1 executes Vb(mutex), p2 can enter CS.
5. In the bounded buffer problem, if the buffer consists of only a single slot, then two binary semaphores, empty and full, are sufficient.
6. Initially, empty is 1 and full is 0. Thus only the producer can continue while the consumer is blocked.
7. When data has been placed into the buffer, full becomes 1 and the consumer can continue while the producer is blocked.

# **Implementing P and V operations on General Semaphores**
A general semaphore s can be implemented using a regular integer variable manipulated by the functions P(s) and V(s)
- To guarantee only one operation at a time can access and manipulate s, a binary semaphore is used

The variable s serves a dual purpose:
- When s is greater or equal to 0:
	- s represents the value of the semaphore
- When s falls below 0
	- The abs value of s is the number of processes blocked on the semaphore

To **avoid** busy-waiting inside P(s) when s falls below 0:
- The process performs a blocking request
- This places the process on a waiting list associated with s
- A V(s) operation increments s and reactivated one process if one or more are blocked on s

**Implementation of general semaphores**
1. The implementation of P and V uses an integer s to represent the semaphore. A waiting list is associated with s, where blocked processes wait for s > 0.
2. P(s) decrements s in a critical section implemented using the binary semaphore ms. If s < 0, the process blocks itself after releasing the critical section.
3. V(s) increments s in a critical section implemented using the same semaphore ms. If s <= 0 then one or more processes are blocked on s. One process is reactivated, still in critical section.
4. If s = 1 initially, a process p1 decrements s. Since s is not less than 0, the process completes the P operation and leaves.
5. If p1 repeats the same P operation, s becomes -1, and the process blocks itself on s. The value s = -1 indicates that 1 process is blocked.
6. When another process, p2, tries to pass the P operation, s is again decremented and p2 becomes blocked on s. The value s = -2 indicates that 2 processes are blocked.
7. A subsequent V operation increments s. Since s is less than or equal 0, V reactivates p1 from the waiting list, which exits the critical section and continues executing.
8. Another V(s) operation reactivates p2, leaving the waiting list empty and the semaphore equal to 0.
9. One more V(s) operation only increments s again but no process is reactivated