P and V are good at solving synch errors, but due to their primitive nature, they are prone to difficult to diagnose programming errors.

# **Basic Principles of Monitors**
A monitor is a high-level sync primitive implemented using P and V operations.
- Following the principles of abstract data types, a monitor encapsulates data along with functions through which the data may be accessed and manipulated

A **condition variable** is a named queue on which processes can wait for some condition to become true

The implementation of a monitor must:
- Guarantee that the functions are mutually exclusive 
	- Thus only one process at a time may be executing inside a monitor
- Provide condition variables such that a process can step outside of the monitor while waiting for a condition
	- Thus not prevent other processes from entering the monitor
	- A condition variable c is accessed using two operations:
		- c.wait
			- Causes the executing process to block and be placed on a waiting queue associated with the condition variable c
		- c.signal
			- reactivates the process at the head of the queue associated with the condition variable c

**Operation of a monitor**
1. A monitor M has an internal variable x and 2 functions, f and g.
2. A process entering the monitor by calling M.f() must wait for x to be positive before proceeding. A condition variable x_is_positive is defined for that purpose.
3. Process p1 calls M.f() and finds x = -1. Executing "x_is_positive.wait" blocks the process on the condition variable.
4. When another process p2 calls M.g() and sets x = 5, the condition is satisfied and the statement "x_is_positive.signal" reactivates the blocked process p1.
5. Now p1 can resume executing f and p2 can continue executing g. But the monitor definition stipulates that only one process may execute inside the monitor.
6. The semantics of signal grant the blocked process p1 the right to continue immediately while the signaling process p2 becomes blocked in a high-priority queue called urgent.
7. When p1 exits the function f, the blocked process p2 is reactivated and can complete the function g.


# **A Monitor Implementation of the Bounded-Buffer Problem**
Since the monitor guarantees mutual exclusion:
- The functions to deposit and to remove data automatically become critical sections
- This solution also works for multiple producers and multiple consumers

The condition notfull is used by the producer to wait when all buffer slots are full

The condition notempty is used by the consumer to wait when all buffer slots are empty

- A counter, full_slots, initially set to 0, is used to keep track of how many slots are full
- The counter is incremented by the producer and decremented by the consumer during each call to the monitor

**Operation of the bounded buffer monitor**
1. The buffer is an array accessible via the functions deposit and remove. Initially, all slots are empty (full_slots = 0)
2. If a consumer process c1 calls remove(), then c1 becomes blocked on the notempty condition.
3. A producer process p1 calls deposit(). Since free slots are available (full_slots != n), p1 places the data into the buffer, increments full_slots, and signals any process blocked on notempty.
4. c1 reenters the remove() function, removes the data from the buffer, decrements full_slots, and signals the notfull queue. Since no process is blocked, the signal has no effect.
5. If producers run ahead of consumers by n steps then all buffer slots become full. All subsequent producers become blocked on notfull until at least one slot becomes empty again.
6. A subsequent removal triggers the first blocked producer to reenter and complete the deposit.
7. As long as full_slots is greater than 0 and less than n, all producers and all consumers will proceed without entering the notfull or notempty queues.

# **Monitors With Priority Waits**
Normally a queue associated with a conditional variable is processed in FIFO
- Some applications require additional control over the order of process reactivation

A **priority wait** has the form **c.wait(p)** where c is a conditional variable and p is an integer specifying a priority according to which process blocked on c are reactivated

**Operation of the alarm clock monitor**
1. A monitor alarm_clock provides a facility for processes to get blocked for n number of time ticks by calling the function wakeme(n). The shared variable now, initially 0, keeps the current time.
2. A condition variable wakeup is provided for processes to await the time to wake up.
3. If p1 calls wakeme(3) at time now = 10, then p1's alarm_setting = 10 + 3 = 13. Since now is less than alarm_setting, p1 is blocked on the wakeup queue.
4. Similarly, if p2 and p3 call wakeme(1) at time now = 10, then p2's and p3's alarm_setting = 10 + 1 = 11. Since now is less than alarm_setting, p2 and p3 are also blocked on the wakeup queue.
5. A hardware interrupt periodically calls the function tick, which increments the current time, now, by 1. The function then issues a signal to the first process blocked on the wakeup queue.
6. The problem is that p1 would wake up before p2 and p3, even though p2's and p3's alarm settings are lower (11) than p1's alarm setting (13).
7. When priority waits are used, where alarm_setting is the priority, all processes are sorted in increasing order of alarm_setting.
8. The next tick increments now to 11 and the signal reactivates p2. Since now = alarm_setting, p2 exits the while loop and leaves the monitor.
9. Before leaving the monitor, p2 issues a wakeup.signal to assure that, if the next blocked process (p3) has the same alarm_setting as p2, the process is reactivated before the next tick is called.
10. p3's alarm setting is equal to now and thus p3 leaves the monitor. p1 awaits 2 more ticks until now = 13.


# **Implementation of a Monitor**
Compiler or preprocessor used P and V operations on semaphores to enforce the different features of a monitor:
- A semaphore mutex
	- Initialized to 1
	- used to enforce mutual exclusion among the functions
- A semaphore c
	- Initialized to 0
	- Used for each condition variable c to allow a process to block itself on the condition
- A semaphore urg
	- Initialized to 0
	- used to block a process executing a signal operation
- Associated with each semaphore c is a counter c_cnt
	- Keeps track of the number of processes blocked on c
- Associated with the semaphore urg is a counter urg_cnt
	- Keeps track of the number of processes blocked on urg

The compiler replaces each function body and all wait and signal operations with the following code:

Function body:
```
P(mutex)
function body
if (urg_cnt > 0)
V(urg)
	else V(mutex)
```

c.wait:
```
c_cnt = c_cnt + 1
if (urg_cnt > 0)
V(urg)
	else V(mutex)
P(c)
c_cnt = c_cnt - 1
```

c.signal
```
if (c_cnt > 0)
	urg_cnt = urg_cnt + 1
	V(c)
	P(urg)
	urg_cnt = urg_cnt - 1
```

