# **The Readers-Writers Problem**
- Extension of the critical section problem
	- Two types of processes
		- Readers
		- Writers
	- Compete for access to a common resource
	- Readers are allowed to enter the [[Critical Section|CS]] concurrently
	- Only one writer is allowed to enter at a time

Main challenge:
- Guarantee maximum concurrency of readers while preventing starvation of either type of process

Two rules must be enforced:
- A reader is permitted to join other readers in the [[Critical Section|CS]] only when no writer is waiting
	- When the last readers exits the [[Critical Section|CS]] the writer is allowed to enter
- All readers that have arrived while a writer is in the [[Critical Section|CS]] must be allowed to enter before the next writer

**Order of readers and writers entering the critical section**
1. Three readers arrive at the CS. Since the CS is empty, all three are allowed to enter.
2. A fourth reader arrives. Since no writer is waiting, r4 is allowed to join the other readers.
3. When a writer arrives, no more readers are allowed to enter.
4. When the last reader leaves, w1 is allowed to enter.
5. While w1 is in CS, other readers and writers may arrive.
6. When w1 leaves, all readers, including those arriving after w2 and w3, are allowed to enter.


# **A Monitor Solution to the Readers-Writers Problem**
The Monitor provides 4 functions:
- start_read
	- Called by a reader to get a permission to read
- end_read
	- Called by a reader when finished reading
- start_write
	- Called by a writer to get permission to write
- end_write
	- Called by a writer when finished writing

Counters:
- reading
- writing
Used to keep track of the number of readers and the number of writers currently in [[Critical Section|CS]]

Condition Variables:
- ok_to_read
- ok_to_write
Used to block readers and writers respectively

To avoid maintaining separate counters of processes blocked on a condition c:
- Primitive count(c) is provided
	- Returns the number of processes blocked on c
	- Ex: count(ok_to_read) returns the number of processes blocked on ok_to_read

**Readers-Writers problem using a monitor**
1. A reader r1 calls start_read(). Since no writer or reader is in the CS, r1 increments the reading counter and enters the CS. The ok_to_read.signal has no effect since the queue is empty.
2. A second reader, r2, arrives. The conditions are the same and thus r2 joins r1 in the CS.
3. A writer w1 arrives and calls start_write. Since reading > 0, w1 blocks on ok_to_write.
4. The next reader, r3, finds the queue ok_to_write not empty and so r3 blocks on ok_to_read.
5. r1 leaves the CS and calls end_read. The reading counter is decremented but r1 is not the last process to leave and thus no signal is issued.
6. When r2 leaves the CS, reading becomes 0. Since r2 is the last process to leave the CS, r2 signals to w1 to resume. Since the signal is the last operation, r2 leaves the monitor without blocking.
7. w1 re-enters, sets writing to 1, and enters CS.
8. While w1 is in the CS, a reader r4 and a writer w2 arrive. Since writing = 1, both processes get blocked on the respective queues.
9. When w1 leaves the CS, a signal enables r3 to re-enter.
10. Upon re-entering, r3 signals to the next reader on the queue, r4, which, in turn would signal to the next reader on the queue until all readers accumulated thus far had entered the CS.


# **The Dining-Philosophers Problem**
The Dining-Philosophers problem is when there are multiple processes competing for shared resources but each process needs more than one resource at a time

Problem: Five "philosophers", each representing a concurrent process, are seated around a table. Five "forks", each representing a resource, are placed on the table such that each two neighboring philosophers share one fork. Each philosopher alternates asynchronously between a phase of "thinking", which represents execution not requiring any shared resources, and "eating", which requires the prior acquisition of the two forks adjacent to the philosopher and shared with the two respective neighbors.

Main challenge: Prevent deadlock while guaranteeing that any two nonadjacent philosophers can always eat concurrently


# **Approaches to Preventing Deadlock**

- The behavior of each philosopher can be represented as a loop that alternates between the phases of thinking and eating
- Prior to eating, p[i] requests the two adjacent forks and returns the forks when finished eating
- Forks can be represented as 5 semaphores (f[0]-f[4]) all initialized to 1
- P(f[i]) corresponds to picking up fork f[i]
- V(f[i]) corresponds to putting down fork f[i]

Approaches to avoid deadlock:
1. Request both forks at the same time in a critical section
2. One philosopher picks up the forks in the opposite order from all other philosophers

**Preventing deadlock in the dining-philosophers problem**
1. One approach to preventing all philosophers from picking up the left fork first and becoming deadlocked is to force both forks to be picked up at the same time in a critical section.
2. When one philosopher, p[2], has picked up the left fork, mutex is 1 and all other philosophers get blocked on P(mutex). p[2] is able to request and get the right fork and thus deadlock is prevented.
3. But concurrency may be violated as shown in the following steps: When p[0] and p[2] are eating, p[3] is blocked on the left fork and p[1] and p[4] are blocked on P(mutex).
4. When p[0] puts down the forks, p[4] remains blocked on mutex. Thus the solution violates the concurrency requirements: p[4] should be allowed to eat concurrently with p[2].
5. With approach 2, each philosopher picks up the lower-numbered fork first. p[0] through p[3] pick up f[0] through f[3] first, respectively. But p[4] picks up the right fork f[0] before the left fork f[4] because 0<4.
6. The new order prevents deadlock because the cycle cannot be closed regardless of whether p[0] or p[4] picks up f[0] first.
7. If p[0] wins and picks up f[0] first then both p[0] and p[4] get blocked and p[3] can continue.
8. If p[4] wins and picks up f[0] first then p[4] or p[3] each hold one fork and compete for f[4]. Regardless of which of the two wins, one can continue and thus deadlock is not possible.
9. But concurrency can still be violated. When p[3] is eating, all others can become blocked in a chain waiting for each other. Thus neither p[0] nor p[1] can eat concurrently with p[3].


# **A Monitor Solution to the Dining Philosophers Problem**

Each philosopher can be in one of 3 states:
- Thinking
	- Does not require any forks
- Hungry
	- Philosopher is blocked because one or both forks are not available
- Eating
	- Philosopher is holding both forks and is executing

Forks are not represented by any data structure
- The change in state to eating requires p[i-1] and p[i + 1] not to be eating
- Deadlock is not possible because no forks are picked up one at a time
- Act of picking up a fork is represented by the state change

Concurrent Execution is guaranteed
- The putdown function explicitly enables p[i-1] if p[i-2] is not eating
- Also enables p[i+1] if p[i+2] is not eating

**Behavior of the dining-philosophers monitor**
1. Five processes p[i] share the monitor. The initial state of all p[i]s is thinking (T).
2. p[1] wishes to eat and calls pickup(). p[1]'s state changes to hungry (H). The internal function test() checks if the left neighbor p[i-1 mod 5] or the right neighbor p[i+1 mod 5] is eating.
3. If neither neighbor is eating, p[1]'s state changes to eating (E) and p[1] leaves the monitor holding both forks. The signal in test has no effect in this case.
4. While p[1] is eating, p[2] requests forks. p[2]'s state becomes H but test does not change the state to E since p[1] is eating. Thus p[2] becomes blocked on eat[2].
5. If p[4] now calls pickup, the state first changes to H and then test changes the state to E since neither p[3] nor p[0] are eating. p[4] leaves the monitor holding both forks and eats concurrently with p[1].
6. When p[1] finishes eating and calls putdown to return the forks, the state of p[1] changes back to T. The putdown function then calls test on both of p[1]'s neighbors, p[0] and p[2].
7. When test is called on the left neighbor p[0], the state does not change to E since p[0] is not hungry.
8. But when test is called on the right neighbor p[2], all three conditions are true and the state of p[2] changes to E.
9. The signal reactivates p[2], which leaves the monitor and starts eating concurrently with p[4].

# **The Elevator Algorithm**
A storage disk consists of n concentric tracks that need to be accessed by read/write requests arriving in some unspecified order. The goal is to minimize the travel distance between tracks while preventing starvation.

The elevator algorithm mimics the behavior of an elevator in an n-story building. The elevator (representing the read-write head of the disk), maintains a direction of motion, up or down, for as long as requests for floors (representing disk tracks) exist, in the current direction. When moving up and no more requests for higher floors exist, the elevator reverses direction and services all requests in descending order. When the request for the lowest floor is serviced, the elevator again reverses direction and proceeds moving up.

**Operation of the Elevator Algorithm**
1. Initially, the elevator is at floor 1, the direction is up, and the elevator is not busy.
2. A request move_to(15) arrives. The elevator is not busy so the request is not blocked. Busy is set to 1 and position is set to 15.
3. While the elevator is busy at floor 15, a requests move_to(25) arrives. Since 25 is above the current position 15, the request is blocked in upsweep.
4. Subsequent requests for floors 30 and 20 are also blocked in upsweep but the use of priority waits keeps all request sorted in ascending order by destination.
5. Requests for floors 5,13, and 3 are inserted into downsweep but sorted from largest to smallest since the wait uses -destination as the priority.
6. If the elevator is busy at floor 15 and a request for the same floor arrives then the request must be blocked according to the current direction to be serviced during the same sweep.
7. When the first request is serviced, the process calls release. Since the elevator is still moving up and the upsweep queue is not empty, a signal reactivates the next process, which uses the same floor 15.
8. When floor 15 is serviced, each subsequent call to release reactivates the next request and the elevator keeps moving up. When floor 30 is reached, the direction is reversed.
9. The downsweep signal reactivates the first request from the downsweep queue and the elevator moves to the new position 13.
10. The elevator then continues moving down until the lowest floor (3) is serviced and the direction is reversed again.

